This animation explains requirements for signs
in the ADA and ABA Standards.
The standards cover informational signs and
directional signs which must meet requirements
for visual legibility.
Examples include signs stating “Notice Employees
Only” or those indicating the location of
elevators.
The standards also address signs that label
permanent rooms and spaces, such as restrooms,
and require them to be tactile as well as
visually accessible.
Some types of signs are exempted from coverage
and are not required to comply.
These include:
• Temporary signs such as those indicating
an element is currently out of service;
• Building addresses and directories;
• Company names and logos;
• Occupant names;
• Menus;
• Seat and row designations in assembly
areas; and
• Signs in non-public areas of detention
and correctional facilities.
The sign requirements generally apply only
where signs are provided, but the standards
do require the provision of signs to identify
certain accessible elements and spaces, such
as entrances, restrooms, and parking spaces.
These signs must include specified international
symbols that are depicted in the standards,
including the International Symbol of Accessibility
or ISA.
The required symbol must be either light against
a dark background or dark against a light
background.
The standards do not specify particular colors,
levels of contrast, or sign size, but they
do require signs to have a non-glare finish.
Accessible entrances of a facility must be
labeled by the ISA if some of the entrances
are inaccessible.
In addition, directional signs with the ISA
must be provided at inaccessible entrances
to indicate the location of the nearest accessible
entrance.
Similar provisions apply to the labelling
of accessible toilet rooms and bathing facilities
when not all are accessible.
Aside from the ISA, additional content for
directional signs is not specified and may
simply include an arrow.
However, verbiage such as “Accessible Entrance”
or further detail on location, for example
“Use C Street Entrance,” can be helpful.
Directional signs should be located to prevent
or minimize back-tracking.
A directional sign located at the beginning
of the approach to an inaccessible entrance
is usually more convenient then one placed
immediately at the entrance.
The ISA also must be used to identify accessible
parking spaces.
In addition, compliant checkout aisles must
be labelled by the ISA unless all of them
are accessible.
The International Symbol of Access for Hearing
Loss, which depicts the shape of an ear and
a diagonal line, is required to indicate the
availability of assistive listening systems
serving assembly areas.
The International TTY symbol, which shows
a phone handset above a keypad, must be provided
to identify public payphones that are equipped
with TTYs or text telephones and indicate
their location on directional signs.
Some signs must be tactile and have both raised
characters and braille in addition to being
visually accessible.
These requirements apply to signs that identify
“permanent” rooms and spaces, meaning
those whose function, and thus designation,
is not likely to change over time or without
significant alteration.
Examples include:
• room and floor numbers or letters;
• room names;
• labels for restrooms, locker rooms, cafeterias,
libraries, conference rooms, break rooms,
mechanical rooms, areas of refuge and other
permanent rooms and spaces.
In addition, tactile and visual signs must
be provided to label:
• exit doors at exit stairways, exit passageways,
and exit discharge.
They also are required where:
• signs are provided to identify rail stations
or station entrances.
The standards limit the requirements for tactile
characters to those types of signs that are
usually located at a door or doorway.
For people with little or no vision, doors
and doorways provide a cue that helps locate
signs by touch.
Other types of signs, including informational
and directional signs, are not as easy to
locate tactilely because they are not often
consistently placed in proximity to doors.
Tactile signs must be installed so that the
baseline of tactile characters is within a
range of 48 inches minimum and 60 inches maximum
above the floor or ground.
A required clear floor space that is 18 inches
by 18 inches and centered on the tactile characters
ensures unobstructed standing space close
to the sign.
This space must be free of any protrusions
to a height of 80 inches.
For safety, no door can swing into this space
when open to 45 degrees.
Tactile signs must be on the latch side of
doors.
There is no exception where glass walls or
partitions or side lights are present.
If there is no wall space at this location,
then signs must be placed on the nearest adjacent
wall.
Signs can be installed on the push side of
doors that have closers and do not have devices
that keep the door in an open positon.
At double doors with two active leafs, the
sign must be located on the right side.
Where one leaf is inactive, the sign is required
on the inactive leaf.
Tactile signs, such as the label for a family
restroom shown here, must be visually accessible
as well.
A non-glare finish is required for the sign,
and characters must contrast from the background
either light-on-dark or dark-on-light.
A minimum level of contrast is not specified,
but the higher the contrast the better, especially
for people with low vision.
Raised characters must be upper case and sans
serif.
They cannot be Italic, oblique, script, highly
decorative, or of other unusual forms.
Characters must be selected from fonts where
the width of the uppercase letter “O”
is between 55% and 110% of the height of uppercase
letter “I.”
Line spacing is required to be 135% to 170%
of the height of raised characters.
Where provided, raised borders or decorative
elements must be separated at least 3/8 of
an inch from raised characters so that they
do not interfere with reading by touch.
Characters must be 5/8 of an inch to 2 inches
high based on the uppercase letter “I.”
The stroke thickness, cannot exceed 15% of
the character height.
Characters must be raised at least 1/32 of
an inch.
Spacing between the two closest points of
adjacent raised characters is required to
be at least 1/8 of an inch and no more than
four times the character stroke width.
If characters have non-rectangular cross sections,
this spacing range applies to the top of the
cross section.
The spacing at the base of the cross section
must be at least 1/16 of an inch and no more
than four times the character stroke width.
The content of raised characters also must
be provided in contracted or “Grade II”
braille.
Braille is read with a light, sweeping touch,
and braille dots must be domed or rounded.
The standards specify the height and diameter
of dots and their spacing within and between
cells.
Braille must be located below the raised characters.
If text is multi-lined, braille is to be located
below the entire text.
Braille must be separated by at least 3/8
of an inch from raised characters and, where
provided, raised borders and decorative elements.
The indication of uppercase letters is to
be used only for proper nouns and names, individual
letters, initials, acronyms, and the first
word of sentences.
The international symbols for accessibility,
hearing loss access, and TTYs are the only
pictograms mandated by the standards.
Requirements apply to other pictograms only
where they are provided.
If a pictogram is used to label a permanent
room or space, it must be on a field at least
6 inches high as shown here on a family restroom
sign.
This measurement applies to the field, not
the pictogram.
The raised and braille text descriptors must
be located directly below, but not within,
the pictogram field.
The pictogram itself is not required to be
raised.
Pictograms and their field must have a non-glare
finish and provide light-on-dark or dark-on-light
contrast.
The requirements for the field height and
text descriptors do not apply to informational
pictograms, such as the international symbol
of accessibility, that may be included on
a sign.
This is an important distinction.
Only those pictograms that identify a permanent
room or space must be on a field at least
6 inches high and include tactile text descriptors.
Examples include pictograms that label restrooms,
stairways, and cafeterias.
Pictograms that do not specifically label
a room or space but instead provide information
about it, or direction to it, are not subject
to the requirements for field height or text
description.
In addition to the international symbol of
accessibility, other examples of these pictograms
include the TTY symbol with a directional
arrow, and icons that prohibit food and drink
or that indicate hazardous materials.
Signs that provide information about, or direction
to, interior spaces and facilities must meet
requirements for visual access but are not
required to be tactile.
These specifications are slightly different
than the visual requirements for tactile signs.
The baseline of visual characters must be
at least 40 inches above the finish floor
or ground.
Signs located above circulation paths must
provide a headroom clearance of at least 80
inches.
A non-glare finish is required, and characters
must contrast from the background either light-on-dark
or dark-on-light.
In this example of a sign stating “Visitors
must sign in,” a low level of contrast between
the character and background colors is not
as readable as a higher level of contrast.
Unlike tactile characters, visual characters
can be upper and lower case.
They cannot be italic, oblique, script, highly
decorative, or of other unusual forms.
Line spacing is required to be 135% to 170%
of the character height.
The stroke thickness is required to be from
10% to 30% of the height of the uppercase
“I.”
The space between the closest points of adjacent
characters in the same word must be 10% to
35% of this height.
This does not apply to spaces between words.
The character width is based on the uppercase
letter “O” and must be from 55% to 110%
of the character height.
The minimum character height, which is based
on the uppercase letter “I,” is determined
by the height of the message on the sign and
the viewing distance.
Where the baseline of visual characters is
between 40 inches and 70 inches above the
finish floor or ground, and the horizontal
viewing distance is under 6 feet, the character
height must be at least 5/8 of an inch.
If the viewing distance, as determined by
any fixed obstruction that prevents a closer
approach to the sign, is 6 feet or more, the
character height is increased 1/8 of an inch
for every additional foot of viewing distance
over 6 feet.
If characters are located above 70 inches
to a height of 120 inches, they must be at
least 2 inches high where the viewing distance
is less than 15 feet.
If the viewing distance is greater, then the
minimum character height must be increased
1/8 of an inch for every foot of additional
viewing distance above 15 feet.
Characters more than 10 feet above the floor
or ground must be at least 3 inches high if
the viewing distance is under 21 feet.
Where the viewing distance is greater, the
minimum character height is increased 1/8
of an inch for every foot of viewing distance
above 21 feet.
Content on some signs may be subject to different
requirements in the standards.
This sign, for example, notes the name and
title of an office occupant, “Jill Smith,
Director.”
This portion of the sign is not required to
meet any specifications since occupant names
are exempt.
Below the name and title is the term “Accounting
Department” which, in this example, is considered
informational and subject to requirements
for visual characters.
Beneath this is noted the room number “403”
which serves as the label of a permanent room
or space and must meet requirements for visual
and raised characters, including braille.
The other content of the sign can be tactile
as well, but this is not required.
The requirements for visual characters and
for tactile characters can be satisfied on
separate signs.
In fact, duplicate signs are necessary to
label certain exits.
Life safety and building codes address the
visibility and illumination of exit signs.
These requirements typically must be met separately
from the tactile signs required by the ADA
and ABA Standards at exit doors serving exit
stairways, exit passageways, and exit discharge.
Where raised and visual characters are provided
on separate signs, the tactile sign does not
need to meet requirements for finish and contrast.
Also, raised characters can be one half inch
high instead of 5/8 of an inch.
Further guidance on signs and other requirements
in the ADA and ABA Standards is available
from the U.S. Access Board.
This animation was developed by the U.S. Access
Board in cooperation with the Federal agencies
that issue the ADA and ABA Standards.